---
layout: post
title: "News #2: Just for a Day"
author: "Alper Nebi Yasak"
date: 2023-12-25 19:30:00 +0300
categories: news
tags: news
---

This is Anchorboot News #2, a semi-regular update post about the state
of the project. I've been continuing my bad habit of multi-tasking with
other Chromebook work like adding support for MT8173 and MT8183 SoCs to
Debian, improving ALSA UCM support in PulseAudio and PipeWire, and
contributing to postmarketOS release testing.

In the scope of the project, I've mostly worked on coreboot this time.
Continued trying to get graphics working on QEMU in a general way and
working out issues with QEMU-related coreboot code. I still need to
clean up some of the patches before I'd feel comfortable posting them,
but that's almost done.

Here's the bits and pieces relevant to the project:


QEMU Bochs Display
------------------

I've managed to get the Bochs display to work on other architectures
(ARMv7, ARM64 and RISC-V) in a more generic way, without breaking it on
x86. However, testing on QEMU virtual machines for other architectures
revealed some issues. 

One problem is, the "qemu-armv7" mainboard used by coreboot is intended
for the [Arm Versatile Express (vexpress-a9) platform](https://qemu-project.gitlab.io/qemu/system/arm/vexpress.html),
instead of the ["virt" generic virtual platform](https://qemu-project.gitlab.io/qemu/system/arm/virt.html)
that I'm used to running QEMU with. The former doesn't support PCI
(among other things) which is necessary to add a Bochs display device,
but at least it has a PL111 display instead that works with coreboot.


ARMv7 "virt" mainboard
----------------------

I ended up creating a new mainboard for the ARMv7 "virt" platform,
mostly based on the existing "qemu-aarch64" one. Comparing the latter
with the upstream "qemu-armv7". This allows a lot more peripherals that
will mostly be useful for the OS that would eventually run on the VM,
but the relevant thing here is that it enables testing the Bochs driver
on ARMv7. However it also revealed another issue with detecting how
much RAM the virtual machine has.

This is mostly complete as a standalone mainboard, but I'm thinking it
might be possible and better to integrate it as a "variant" of the
"qemu-armv7" mainboard, which would reduce code duplication.


RAM Detection on QEMU
---------------------

To detect how much RAM a QEMU virtual machine has, coreboot tries
[accessing potentially out-of-RAM regions](https://review.coreboot.org/plugins/gitiles/coreboot/+/refs/heads/main/src/lib/ramdetect.c)
and checks if the data it wrote is discarded. QEMU 2.11 started raising
[data aborts instead of silently discarding data](https://lore.kernel.org/qemu-devel/1504626814-23124-1-git-send-email-peter.maydell@linaro.org/T/),
which breaks this detection mechanism.

This doesn't happen on the vexpress-a9 board, because QEMU falls back to
the old behaviour as a per-board quirk. On the coreboot side, the issue
is [worked around on ARM64 with exception handlers](https://review.coreboot.org/c/coreboot/+/34774),
and [reported with a similar fix on RISC-V](https://ticket.coreboot.org/issues/254) 
which didn't get merged yet. I tried to replicate the exception handler
mechanism on my ARMv7 virt port, but ended up with corruption that I
don't know how to resolve.

I managed to get it done via QEMU's Firmware Configuration (fw\_cfg)
device, but it's a hack. Arm is trying to standardize ARM64 firmware
space, and there's a [QEMU "sbsa-ref" platform](https://qemu-project.gitlab.io/qemu/system/arm/sbsa.html)
intended for developing specification-compliant firmware which we might
want to switch to. That doesn't have the fw\_cfg device as it's meant to
look like real hardware, but it provides memory details over Devicetree.
So probably the best answer here is to parse that to get RAM details.


QEMU Firmware Configuration Driver
----------------------------------

QEMU can report various details via a [Firmware Configuration device](https://www.qemu.org/docs/master/specs/fw_cfg.html)
that we can access from coreboot, and there is already an x86-specific
driver implemented for it as part of the "qemu-i440fx" mainboard. One of
the things we can access on this device is the RAM size, so I decided to
try to get it working on ARMv7 to help fix the issue above.

I trimmed the driver down to its basics on my ARMv7 "virt" port, and
managed to get it working enough to read data from QEMU. It is supposed
to have the RAM size as a `ram_size` configuration file, but this is
missing on ARM platforms, as seen by running a QEMU ARMv7 VM with an
additional `--trace "fw_cfg*"` argument.

While trying to figure that out, I noticed an `etc/smbios/smbios-tables`
in the list of files the device has. SMBIOS has the necessary memory
information, so I wrote a makeshift parser to extract what we need out
of that, solving the RAM issue. But I don't think that is the right way.

I need to work on merging my ARMv7-specific modifications into the
x86-board-specific driver and making it usable from others as well.


PCIe Support on QEMU RISC-V
---------------------------

While comparing the "qemu-aarch64" mainboard to the "qemu-armv7" one, I
figured out what's necessary for PCIe support (through generic ECAM
mechanisms) that we need for a Bochs display device. Knowing it's
applicable to RISC-V as well, I got it working there too.


Bootsplash Troubles
-------------------

Coreboot upstream also has [replaced their JPEG decoder with Wuffs'](https://review.coreboot.org/c/coreboot/+/78271),
which causes a minor hiccup for running QEMU with our bootsplash. It
needs quite a bit of space on the heap, and the defaults are too small.
I'll try to figure out a nice value to increase it to when a boot splash
is enabled, I don't know if it depends on the image size or content.
